Welcome.
I'm Chris Peak.
And I'm Shantonu Sen.
And this afternoon we're going to
be talking about the architecture
of and the Keck's transition
to the Mac OS X 64-bit kernel.
So you might have heard that this
disk contains a new exciting addition,
a 64-bit kernel, which we call K64.
And what's more, it's all here.
You don't have to send
away for a 64-bit addition.
But I have to remind you, of course,
that the Leopard kernel and
indeed the default kernel for
Snow Leopard is still 32-bit.
Which may be confusing to some
because we keep on saying that
Mac OS X is 64-bit from top to bottom.
And that's certainly true
for the application stack,
but the kernel has its own stack,
as you know.
And it's still 32-bit.
OS X is unique amongst mainstream
operating systems in providing 64-bit
application support but retaining
a 32-bit kernel and 32-bit drivers.
So if that's all wonderful, why K64?
Why 64-bit now?
I'll be trying to explain
that this afternoon.
But perhaps the most pressing
question that you might have is,
how does this affect me?
Well, I've got very good news if
you develop applications.
There is nothing to worry about.
K64 is application transparent.
Applications neither know nor
care that they're running on K64.
Applications, be they 32-bit or 64-bit,
they run the same binary.
They link against the same libraries.
Nothing has changed.
In fact, it's even better than that.
They may actually run faster,
particularly if they're 32-bit.
If, however, you develop KEXTs,
you must be aware that
K64 requires 64-bit KEXTs.
That is, if you have a KEXT,
you have to port it to 64-bit.
However, we at Apple have got a number
of KEXTs that we develop,
and we found that
It's not as difficult as you might
immediately think to port to 64-bit.
And this afternoon,
we hope to give you some insights and
show you some tools and techniques
so that the transition for your kecks
can be as easy as it has been for us.
So what are you going
to learn this afternoon?
Well, I'll point out the differences
between the 32-bit kernel,
which we call K32 these days, and K64,
the 64-bit kernel.
And we'll see how these two
kernels coexist and how they're
integrated into OS X in general.
Shantonu will show you
how to boot into K64.
There's some sorcery involved here,
so pay attention.
And Shantonu will go through the
whole development process to show
you how to port your KEXTs to 64-bit.
He'll go over some best coding practices
which will allow you to prepare your KEXT
For the transition,
he will show you how to compile and link
and show you which checkboxes to use.
He'll show you how to load
and run and test and debug all
the familiar stuff because,
say again, you have to port your kecks
to 64-bit to run on K64.
So why K64?
Well, what I want to do to provide some
context for this is to look back through
Time Machine over the last few years,
the development,
and see what machines have been released
and to look at the development of the
kernel over that time so that you can
see the direction that we're headed in.
So let's go back first to WWDC three
years ago and the Intel transition.
We released the developer transition kit,
which was a machine that outwardly
was disguised as a G5 Mac,
but inside it has a 3.6 gigahertz
Pentium 4 Intel processor,
the Prescott microarchitecture.
It supported a gigabyte of RAM,
and although it was 64-bit capable,
ironically,
We only ran it in 32-bit mode,
and obviously its intention was
for you to port your applications
and your KEXTs from PPC to i386,
which is the identification for the
32-bit Intel architecture that we use.
So let's look internally at
the virtual memory layout.
With a 32-bit machine, as you're aware,
you've got
Four gigabytes to play with.
And in the initial developer release,
we adopted a 3-1 shared address split.
3 gigabytes for the user and just
2 gigs for kernel and kex combined.
And being one shared space,
it is convenient.
It uses one set of page tables.
And the transition from kernel to user,
user to kernel, is relatively fast.
If you're familiar with Linux,
this is the default 32-bit configuration
for most Linux distributions,
probably all.
If you're familiar with Windows,
of course, it's not the default
Windows configuration.
Windows has a 2:2 split,
although you may be aware of a
slightly obscure 3GB boot option which
allows you to get this configuration.
[Transcript missing]
The first Intel machines were released.
At first, the iMac and MacBook Pro.
and later the Mini and other machines.
Initially, this was powered by a
2 gigahertz core duo,
Yonah microarchitecture.
It supported 2 gigabytes of
RAM and was only 32 bits.
Now at this time,
we took the opportunity to align the
memory layout to be consistent with PPC.
And we adopted a 4:4 split.
separate address spaces
for kernel and user,
which has the advantage that they
each have four gigabytes to play with.
But there's a slight penalty in
transitioning between user and
kernel on interrupt or system call.
There is, in fact,
a shared high area which is the
portal between these spaces.
It performs a kind of a high wire act.
It's a delicate process
to switch address spaces.
Up there are
positioned the trap handlers,
the interrupt and exception routines,
the trampolines.
And they're responsible for
switching between user and kernel,
or back again, like that.
Okay, moving ahead, WWDC two years ago,
the Mac Pro was released.
A fine 3 GHz Core 2 Duo,
the Marone microarchitecture.
This machine supported 16 gigs.
and had 64 bits,
which we identify as X86-64.
There are other acronyms
available from Intel,
which we use occasionally.
We don't, however,
use the contraction X64.
Neither do we use AMD64,
and certainly not IA64, of course,
which is Itanium.
So this provided an extra long
mode to give you the 64-bit.
I prefer to think of it as
width rather than length.
You've got double the number
of general purpose registers,
double the number of XMM registers.
Some new instructions,
all sorts of goodies,
some subtle and some not.
But really, the key thing here,
especially for those of you
programming in a high-level
language in C or C++ in the kernel,
the important thing is the 64 bits.
You don't see the extra registers.
It's the LP64,
the longs and pointers being 64,
which is how it manifests itself.
Now,
in addition to the 64-bit capability,
This architecture has a
32-bit compatibility mode,
which is a sub-mode of 64-bit,
which allows you to run 32-bit
code at full native speed,
although you only have the
eight registers and 32 bits,
and you can only run in the
bottom four gigs of memory,
of virtual memory.
But the all-important factor here
is the 64-bit memory management.
Take a bit of a deep dive into
what the 64-bit space gives us.
Now, as programmers,
we tend to have our own mental
models of how address spaces work,
and sometimes we draw diagrams,
but they're rarely to scale,
as I've already demonstrated.
So let's just take this dull gray box,
this 32-bit address space,
and let's imagine it as a linear space,
a single dimension,
with 2 to the 32 points in it.
And let's stretch this
from the sun to the earth.
Which is a long way.
It's one astronomical unit, technically.
But 2 to the 32 is also a big number.
So it turns out that points in this
space are separated by roughly 100 feet.
Just over 100 feet.
Or if you will,
a bit every about 10 feet.
So you can kind of visualize that,
a bit every 10 feet from
the sun to the earth.
So how does this change
when we go to 64-bit?
Well, of course,
that gets expanded to 2 to
the 32 astronomical units.
So how far is that?
Outside the solar system?
Easily.
To the nearest star?
Yup, easy too.
Give you a clue.
2 to the 16 astronomical units
is 65,000 astronomical units.
That's one light year, almost exactly.
It's quite surprising.
So, 2 to the 32 astronomical
units is 65,000 light years.
And coincidentally,
65,000 light years is the
radius of the Milky Way galaxy.
So, the 64-bit address space may
not be the final frontier.
It may not be cosmic in scale.
It may not even be universal, dare I say.
But it's certainly galactic.
So let's bring you back to
Earth and talk about how the chip
designers have implemented 64-bits.
In its first implementation,
we don't get to play with
the full galactic space.
We're left with only 48 bits of
virtual space and less than that,
40 bits of physical space.
So let's look at how the
machine translates the virtual
address to a physical address.
This tends to make
people's eyes glaze over,
but I'll go briefly through this.
Hardware Register CR3 points
physically to the base page table.
The top nine bits of our 48-bit usable
virtual address space selects one of 512
entries in the first level page table,
which provides the physical
address of the next level,
and so on down through the page tables.
And finally,
we add the 12-bit page offset to
find the physical 40-bit address.
Okay,
I've left out lots of details there.
The things to remember,
there's just two things.
Firstly, note there's four levels
of page tables here,
which is one more than the
three-level page table that we used
for 32-bit address translation.
And the second thing to note
is these top 16 bits play
no part of that translation.
But they're subject to a rule
that the hardware enforces.
All those bits must be identical,
must be the same,
and they must be equal to the 47th bit.
You can't just have
any old pattern there.
In fact, if you do,
the machine will throw an exception.
The result is, rather curiously,
that you get this hole,
this region of invalid addresses,
or non-canonical addresses
as they're called,
right in the middle
of your address space.
Now, of course,
it's actually bigger than that.
It's 2 to the 16 times.
It's 65,000 times the
size of the valid space.
So the picture is more like that.
So you're rather curiously left
with these islands of valid space,
128 terabytes each,
one at the bottom and one at
the top of the address space.
So our galactic scale has been
reduced to two half light years.
So bearing this in mind,
the kernel that we
implemented at Tiger 10.4.7,
which we called the
compatibility mode kernel,
was a 32-bit kernel again, 32-bit KEXTs.
If you boot them on a 32-bit machine,
like the original iMac and MacBook Pro,
We'd use the same 4/4 split.
Everything would proceed as before.
But if you boot on a
machine with 64-bit capable,
then we enable 64-bit mode.
And at that point,
we enter compatibility mode.
We're running 32 bits in the
bottom 4 gigs of address space.
We install the four level page
tables and 64-bit memory management.
And then we map the entire kernel,
double map it, up into the top region,
based at 512 gigabytes down from the top.
And we install new interrupt
and exception handlers,
64-bit code, up in that region.
So what happens when an interrupt
or an exception occurs is if we
happen to be in 32-bit user space,
the machine automatically
switches to 64-bits.
And we vector into the small amount of
64-bit code up there in the top space.
That switches address space,
much like we did with the 4/4 split.
jumps down into the lower portion of
memory and back to compatibility mode.
So at that point,
the kernel is running 32-bit code.
Kecks are running 32 bits.
They know nothing about the 64-bit
machine that they're running on.
And at WWDC '06,
we also added support for 64-bit users.
That was the point.
The way this works is at exact time,
if the kernel spots a 64-bit slice,
an x86-64 architecture
as part of the Mac OS,
then
A 64-bit address space up
to 128 terabytes is created,
and 64-bit lib system is mapped there.
And the entire space is loaded
by default at 4 gigabytes.
And below that,
there's a 4-gigabyte page zero,
which has two interesting properties.
Number one,
it allows us to trap truncated pointers.
So if you've got a 64-bit pointer,
which you've somehow derived
from a 32-bit quantity,
you'll have chopped off the top 32 bits,
and you get left with a pointer
into this bottom region,
and that traps.
So that's useful for
application development.
But we also have the ability to have
the kernel mapped into that portion,
so that once again,
the kernel and 64-bit users
are shared in a shared space.
And that means faster kernel
transitions to and from.
But we retain 32-bit KEXTs,
which do now need to be aware that
their clients may be 64-bit entities,
as indeed the kernel has to.
OK, winding forward to last
October and subsequently,
Leopard provides all platform support.
At the top end, we're now up to a 3.2
gigahertz Core 2 Duo pen/rim.
The top of the line
Mac Pro supports 32 gigs.
And Leopardy is a universal install,
PPC and i386.
But still, there's a 32-bit Intel kernel
support for 32-bit KECSTs.
And through the method I've described,
we support either 32-bit original
machines or 64-bit newer machines.
In user space,
there's now 64-bit libraries
for all frameworks.
So nothing really changed
architecturally for Leopard.
So why 64-bit?
So you might have seen what's been
changing the most over this time.
It's the amount of memory.
We've gone from 1 gig to 32 gigs
in the space of three years.
Physical RAM has been increasing,
but the kernel's 32-bit
virtual address space,
it's 4 gigabytes, hasn't been increasing.
It's running out, running out fast.
To give you an example,
we need in the kernel 64 bytes or more to
describe each 4K page of physical memory.
So on a 64-gigabyte system,
we'd need one gigabyte or more-- that's
a quarter of the available space-- just
to describe the memory in the system.
That's let alone do anything with it.
Before we have a process or
a file or any networking,
anything, and of course frame buffers,
yeah.
So there's no two ways about it.
The kernel requires a
64-bit address space.
And that will provide space for
faster and more advanced devices.
Graphics, as we know,
has got a prodigious appetite for memory.
Storage and networking as it gets faster.
And this, of course,
will mean performance scaling also.
And this trend for memory to go on
increasing is likely to accelerate
because Intel's next generation platform,
the Nehalem architecture,
advertises scalable memory.
Each processor has its own
integrated memory controller.
with multi-channel capability.
And processors are interconnected
by a high bandwidth,
point-to-point, quick path interconnect.
So memory scales with processors.
So, this week, the Snow Leopard preview
includes an extra slice,
a 64-bit,
The booter selects which slice.
It defaults to 32 bits,
but it can be requested
to boot the 64-bit slice.
Once booted,
the KEXT management code will select
KEXTs which have a matching slice.
So only 64-bit KEXTs will load and run.
There's user space transparency,
so the entire application
suite is unchanged.
And you need to bear in mind,
K64 is not a new kernel.
It's a port of the existing kernel.
It's built from the same source.
It's bug-compatible with K32.
We've ported most foundation kegs,
that is the basic kegs,
the disk drivers and families.
And the preview allows you
to boot between K32 and K64.
So looking at the memory,
the memory layout is--
A little different.
We've used the LP64
model inside the kernel,
of course.
It's got 128 terabytes of virtual
address space available to it.
And we're back to a shared address space.
And that means, again,
faster transitions to
and from the kernel.
And there's no mode switching in and out
of compatibility mode inside the kernel,
only at kernel user boundary.
The syscall interface
is completely unchanged.
Applications neither know nor care
what kernel they're running on.
Inside the kernel,
the KPIs have been minimally changed,
weasel words, but we've introduced 64-bit
types only when necessary.
There's actually,
because of our 64-bit work on Tiger,
most I/O Kit KPIs are
already 64-bit clean.
We've taken the opportunity to
remove deprecated interfaces,
but only 64-bit KEXTs.
So now I'm going to hand over to
Shantonu who's going to give you
the practical details of developing
your kecks for the new kernel.
Thank you, Chris.
Let's talk about how you
actually port your kecks to K64.
As Chris mentioned,
for most users and most
application developers,
K64 is completely transparent.
However, some of your products do rely
on KEXT for proper operation,
such as network adapters, file systems,
mass storage devices,
and other peripherals.
It's essential that you port
your KEXT to K64 so that the
transition is as transparent
as possible for your customers.
Your text is probably already
building universal for Leopard,
both 32-bit PowerPC and Intel.
At a fundamental level, for Snow Leopard,
we're talking about moving to 32 64-bit
universal to support the K64 kernel.
We'll talk about some of these
build settings in just a moment.
The K64 development cycle can be
broken down into a few phases:
preparing, building, booting, debugging,
and validating.
You can iterate on this
process as you make changes,
and if you have additional kecks,
you can start at preparing again.
We'll also wrap up with a few
notes on some of the porting
issues you may run into and best
practices for your K64 port.
You can start today
preparing your K64 port.
First of all,
start with the Snow Leopard preview.
It has all of the developer
tools you need to start
building your text for 32-bit,
definitely.
You'll notice that GCC 4.2 is
the default system compiler.
It is stricter about certain C++ syntax,
which may require some source change.
It's also much better at flagging
potential 64-bit incompatibilities.
This is also a great opportunity to
replace calls to deprecated APIs or
classes because those APIs and classes
are most likely not available for K64.
You should also take the time
to enable and resolve as many
compiler warnings as you can.
WL will add the most number
of warnings and flag the most
number of potential issues.
We found that W-shorten-64-to-32 catches
many types of pointer truncation issues,
such as assigning a 64-bit
pointer to a 32-bit variable.
If you don't have prototypes in scope,
you may run into a different kind of
truncation because the compiler will
truncate to an int type by default.
W implicit function declaration
will warn you of this.
Finally, adding W format is important to
make sure your logging code is
logging what you expect it to,
which can be important
for resolving bugs.
This is also a good opportunity to
add 64-bit user space support to
your existing 32-bit KEXT on Leopard.
As Chris mentioned, in Leopard,
most of the framework
stack is 64-bit capable,
and you may already need
to handle 64-bit clients.
We found that this is a great step in
making your KEXT 64-bit safe because
many of the code locations that require
changes for 64-bit user space support are
the same places where you need to make
changes for your 64-bit kernel extension.
Xcode does take care of passing
off the appropriate compiler flags,
but if you do have a
very specialized product,
make sure you're using fAppleText
for C++ code and -mkernel for C code.
So what do you do to build
your kernel extension?
Well, there's a few settings
which are fundamental.
Of course, you'll be adding x86-64 to
your architectures list.
Xcode has a shorthand for this
called 32-64-bit Universal,
which will add x86-64 for you.
Your base SDK must be pointing to either
the current Mac OS or to the 10.6 SDK.
If you have a complex project where some
targets must build 64-bit and others not,
you may be taking advantage of
the valid architecture setting.
In this case, go ahead and add x86-64
to your kex targets.
Finally, GCC 4.2 is required for K64.
If you do need to support multiple
OS revisions and multiple architectures,
you can do that with Xcode and
per-architecture build settings.
This is discussed in more detail in the
session Maximizing Platform Compatibility
of I/O Kit Drivers on Friday.
For now, we'll be talking just
about K64 and Snow Leopard.
Outside of your build settings inspector,
make sure to update your
Info.plist to only use
com.apple.kpi-style dependencies.
These were introduced in Tiger and
should have everything you
need to port your KEXT to K64.
In the Snow Leopard preview,
most I/O Kit families and
most kernel KPIs are K64 safe,
so most of you can start working
on your ports immediately.
The notable exceptions to this are
the Audio family and 802.11 family.
However,
do note that this is a developer preview,
and not all KPIs and
families are finalized,
so there may be some changes required.
How do you boot K64?
Well, for the seed, K64 is supported on
two hardware platforms.
There's the early 2008 MacBook Pro,
including both the 15-inch
and 17-inch models,
and the early 2008 Mac Pro.
These are the Penron-based
models of each.
As Chris mentioned,
the booter is the actual piece
of code that selects which slice
of the universal kernel to load.
It can be instructed to
load the x86-64 slice.
For the preview,
you can hold down 6 and 4 during boot,
and that will instruct the
booter to load the x86-64 slice.
If you'd like to make this persistent,
you can set NVRAM and add the
arch equals x86-64 setting.
When you're done with this,
you can unset it by holding down
Command Option PR at boot to reset NVRAM.
You can go ahead and do this if
you have one of the supported
configurations using your install DVD.
You can boot the install DVD to K64.
How can you tell if you're
actually booted to K64?
Well,
that's a question I'll leave to you.
We do have a lab following
this session at 3:30.
If you have creative answers to this,
come by, and you will have the
opportunity to win a prize.
So creativity is rewarded in this case.
Now that you've built your KEXT for K64,
how do you start loading
and debugging it?
Well,
it turns out that it's mostly the same
as your 32-bit KEXT development process.
Most of the logging APIs are
available just like 32-bit,
such as I/O log, printf,
and firewire kprintf,
if you have a second machine
and a firewire cable.
There's also interactive
GDB debugging using either the
Ethernet or FireWire transports,
just like 32-bit.
There's also the live
kernel debugger for use,
which was introduced at last year's WWDC.
This allows you to do read-only
introspection of your running kernel
if you set the appropriate boot args,
which is KM equals 1.
Do note that GDB defaults to
the x86-64 kernel when you
invoke it with default options,
so you may need to pass -ai-386
if you want to do standard
32-bit Intel kernel development.
Another change in Snow Leopard is
that there's a new tool for doing
.Sim file generation called kextutil.
This will be taking over much
of the developer functionality
of kextload from Leopard.
For more information on this,
there's a session on Friday called
Kernel Extension Management,
which discusses more of
the changes in detail.
You can do most of these today because
the kernel development kit has been
posted for the Snow Leopard preview.
It's available at connect.apple.com.
Here's an example of what you might
see with the kernel debug kit.
This is an example of
the live kernel debugger.
You'll notice that the kernel was built
for the release configuration for x86-64,
and also that all pointers have
been increased to their 64-bit size.
So now that you've gotten some
basic operation out of your kecks,
it's time to start
validating more code paths.
For Snow Leopard, this is the test matrix
you'll need to validate.
The kernel can be
either 32-bit or 64-bit.
Data coming in from user space
can originate from either a 32-bit
process or a 64-bit process.
It can also come from a 32-bit
PowerPC process via Rosetta.
The distinction there is that data
coming in may be Indian swapped.
There's a few communication channels,
which are the primary mechanisms of
getting data into your kernel extension.
If you're an I/O Kit KEXT and
you use I/O User Client,
you may be passing structures or
scalers in and out of the kernel.
That's one of the areas where you
will need to validate your inputs.
If you're more of a BSD-style
KEXT and you publish syscadls
or a custom DevFS node,
you may also need to validate your
structures that are coming in,
especially if you have iOctls
or for file system developers,
you may support the fscuddle interface.
Finally, if you're an I/O Kit KEXT and
you use I/O Registry for
getting and setting properties,
there's good news for you.
No work is required for you because
the I/O Kit user space framework
and kernel side do correctly marshal
data in and out of the kernel.
Let's talk about some of the porting
best practices for minimizing the
amount of effort for your K64 port.
There's quite a bit of existing
documentation available
on developer.apple.com.
Primarily, you'll be interested in the
64-bit transition guide,
which was published a few years ago.
When reading that document,
any time you see a reference
to file format compatibility,
the issues that they're describing
are basically the same as shared
user space kernel structures.
Some of the best practices,
such as using XML as your file format,
also apply to K64.
For example,
you can use the built-in libkern
XML parser to pass plists
in and out of the kernel.
When reading that document,
anytime you see a reference to IPC,
it's very analogous to user
space kernel communication.
This is a good opportunity to define your
structures using fixed-width C99 types.
For instance, in 16T instead of the
fundamental short type,
UN32 instead of unsigned long, usually.
This is actually a tricky case
because your existing text may be
using unsigned long as a shorthand
for a 32-bit integer type.
However, if it's using unsigned
long to store a pointer,
you may instead want to
be using a UN64T type,
which can hold pointers for
both 32-bit and 64-bit tasks.
This is also a good opportunity
to reorder some of your
structures to minimize implicit
changes by the compiler.
We'll give an in-depth example
of this in just one second.
Finally,
make sure you use fields that are wide
enough to hold any type of pointer.
There is the Mach type available
called mach_vm_address_t
if you're an I/O Kit KEXT.
You can also use the C99 type, uint64t.
There's also the Universal Binary
Programming Guidelines,
which has a few tips for general code
portability and specifically talks
about issues such as ndns and alignment.
Let's dive into one specific
porting issue which we've
run into frequently at Apple.
Let's start with this C structure
that's defined on the left.
It's fairly straightforward how
the 32-bit compiler will translate
this into a memory layout.
All of the fields are laid
out contiguously in memory,
and the sizes are what you'd
expect based on the C definition.
What does this look like
for a 64-bit process?
It's quite a bit more complicated.
A tag starts out being the same.
B pointer expands to an 8-byte field,
which is what you would expect since
we're using an LP64 data model.
However,
what's this pad field that's been added?
It turns out that our system
ABI requires that 8-byte values
are aligned on an 8-byte boundary,
which means that implicit padding
must be added between the two fields.
CLAN as much as you would expect.
D flags remains an 8-byte field.
E flags, too, is the same as before.
But again,
padding has been added at the end
of the structure so that the overall
structure is a multiple of 8 bytes.
You can see that compared to
the C structure at the left,
the 64-bit layout has
many unexpected things,
such as implicit pad slots and
fields that have grown in width.
Well, the fields growing,
you might expect, for a 64-bit.
Can we improve on this?
Certainly, because in the worst case,
your kernel extension,
your 32-bit extension and
your 64-bit kernel extension,
would need to interpret
either of these structures.
So you may have to maintain up to four
code paths in your kernel extension.
We're going to improve on this by
reordering some of our structure fields.
In this example, A tag is as before.
However, we've moved up C LAN so that
it occupies what would have
been a pad slot otherwise.
There's two new things about bpointer.
It's unconditionally an 8-byte field so
that it can hold pointers from either
a 32-bit user space process or 64-bit.
And since CLend was moved up,
there's no implicit padding
between a tag and bpointer.
Dflags remains unchanged,
and we've expanded Eflags2 to take up
64 bits so that there's no implicit
padding at the end of our structure.
Although this may waste a few
bits that we might not be using,
this drastically simplifies
the amount of code you need to
maintain in your kernel extension.
Now there's only one code path in your
kernel extension to support both K32,
K64, and data coming in from 32-bit
or 64-bit user processes.
Another issue which you may
run into has to do with types.
The Uint32 type is an unsigned long
for K32 but an unsigned int for K64.
This is done for binary
compatibility of C++ keks for K32.
In both cases,
the type is a 32-bit integer,
but the fundamental C type has changed.
This has a few implications.
For example,
when printing out variables of this type,
it's not clear what
format specifier to use.
Our best recommendation for
now is to stick to treating it
as a lowercase uint32t type,
the C99 type, and cast appropriately,
which will both print out the right
thing and cause no loss of precision.
Most I/O Kit KPIs do use
the capital Uint32 type,
so you will see this quite frequently.
Also, be sure to match the types of
your superclasses methods when
attempting to override them.
For example, in this case, under K32,
it may have worked accidentally
because a UN32 wasn't unsigned long.
Under K64, it won't work.
So make sure you revisit
what you are overriding.
Another issue which causes the
most number of panics has to
do with pointer truncation.
Make sure that when you use APIs,
for instance, for mapping device memory,
that you store the result
of getVirtualAddress in an
appropriately sized variable.
W short 64 to 32 is very
valuable to catch this type of
thing and will flag this error.
As Chris mentioned,
the kernel is linked at a high address
starting with six Fs and eight zero.
So anytime you see a pattern like that,
you know it's probably a kernel address.
If you do get panic reports from
your customers where CR2 register,
which is the faulting address,
looks like it's less than 4 gigabytes,
it may be because of pointer truncation.
However,
that's not always the case because also,
as Chris mentioned,
we do use a shared virtual address space.
So if you do have pointer truncation,
you may dereference memory,
which is valid in a 32-bit user process,
which is mapped at the same time.
You can turn off this optimization by
using the -no-shared-cr3 boot argument.
This effectively gives you a 128-terabyte
page zero for your kernel extension,
which will make sure you
find and get reports on any
potential truncation issues.
One thing to note is that the
kernel debug kit does ship with
a debug configuration kernel.
This defaults to having
the no-shared CR3 flag set.
So that debug kernel is
obviously very helpful in
debugging your kernel extension.
Even though your device may only
support 32 bits of physical addressing,
your kernel extension must support
a full 64-bit virtual address space.
Finally,
another case of pointer truncation may
be because of either implicit prototypes
which default to int in the compiler,
or if you legitimately call
APIs that only take ints.
How much effort can you
expect for your K64 port?
Well, all projects are different,
so we can only give
some rough guidelines.
K64 does use the standard
I/O Kit architecture,
same as K32, so your drivers will remain
essentially unchanged.
You will be doing this
on stable hardware,
and you can boot into K32 at
any time for regression testing.
We've seen some keks
require minimal effort,
such as cross-platform file systems,
which were already using fixed-width
data types for on-disk data
structures and control messages.
If you have an I/O Kit keks which
uses proper family abstractions or
ones where you already added 64-bit
user space support for Leopard,
we found that those usually
require the least amount of effort.
Typically, the changes only are to
in-kernel data structures,
for instance, those that reflect a
piece of device memory.
In those cases, it may be as easy as just
pressing the checkbox.
We've also seen some porting
take a larger amount of effort.
For instance,
those that have complex iOctils,
projects which have a large
number of existing warnings,
because it's difficult to
tell what are the new warnings
because of your K64 port.
and KEX,
which must support multiple OS versions.
Again,
there's a session on Friday dedicated
to telling you the best way to do this.
Let me describe the state of
K64 in the Snow Leopard preview.
Quite a bit works.
These sections I described
earlier on booting,
developing, and debugging can all
be done on a K64 system.
Standard user applications like Safari,
Mail,
and Xcode do work properly under K64.
You'll note that Mail and Xcode
do default to 64-bit user space,
so that is a well-exercised code path,
and Safari can optionally
be run as a 64-bit program.
Most internal devices are supported.
Most file systems are supported,
such as ZFS for the Mac OS X server.
There's also some things that don't work,
such as there's no audio, as I mentioned,
no wireless network,
and currently no accelerated graphics.
There's no sleep or hibernation support,
so those code paths in your kernel
extension cannot be currently exercised.
And finally, there's no D-trace support,
so some of the developer
tools for profiling,
such as instruments,
and also some of the tools like Shark,
do not currently work.
With that, I'll hand it back to Chris.
So related sessions have all
been crowded together on Friday.
There's the Getting Started with I/O Kit,
and for advanced users,
the Maximizing Platform Compatibility,
which Shantonu has mentioned.
And there will be some sample code,
including an x86-64 KEXT.
And finally,
the new kernel extension framework
will be explained in detail.
And right after this
session at 3:30 downstairs,
we are having a 64-bit kernel lab.
So you can come down and try
out some ideas for the prize.
So in summary.
So RAM is ever increasing.
And to cope with that,
we need a 64-bit kernel address space.
And a 64-bit kernel means 64-bit KEXTs.
The development process
is quite straightforward.
As simple as just that checkbox, ideally,
honestly.
And the development process
is completely unchanged.
The KPIs have been minimally updated.
There's some reference
documentation on the developer site.
and come to the lab and test
drive K64 this afternoon.
Or use your own current model
laptop with the Preview DVD.
And start porting your kegs tomorrow.